hi this is pressure locker in this video
I'll teach you a shortcut method to
divide numbers by 19 for example what is
the decimal expansion of for over 19 to
figure it out we'll use a trick of
repeatedly dividing by 2 to get the
first decimal point we take our
numerator of 4 and we divide by 2 4
divided by 2 is equal to 2 and that
means 2 is the first value of the
decimal to get the next value in our
decimal expansion we take 2 divided by 2
that gives us a result of 1 so that
means the next value in our decimal
expansion is 1 we again use our trick
we're going to take our result of one
and again divide it by 2 so 1 divided by
2 is equal to 0 but now we have a slight
complication where we have remainder 1
when we have a remainder we need to
slightly modify our procedure we need to
join the remainder with the result to
get the new value 2 divided by so we
take 1 and 0 to get the new value of 10
mathematically this is the same thing as
saying take 10 times the remainder and
add the result so 10 times 1 is equal to
10 plus 0 is equal to 10 so to get the
fourth spot in our decimal expansion
we're going to take 10 divided by 2 this
is equal to 5 with the remainder of 0 if
you have a remainder of 0 you can
effectively ignore it because 10 times 0
is equal to 0 so to get the next value
in our decimal expansion we take 5
divided by 2 which is equal to 2 with
the remainder of 1 now we need to adjust
the next value we divided by we take our
remainder 1 put on the digit 2 to get 12
so we take 12 divided by 2 is equal to 6
and a remainder 0 we can repeat this
process to figure out more and more
spots of our decimal expansion but what
we figured out is that these valley
of our results to 1:05 2 & 6 this is the
decimal expansion of four over nineteen
point two one zero five two six and is
pretty interesting that we can figure
out how to divide by 19 just by
repeatedly dividing by two you can check
on your calculator this is the correct
result I'm going to show you another
example let's say we want to divide 12
by 19 we have this process of repeatedly
dividing by 2 in order to make it a
little easier I'm going to write the
result as remainder result because the
two-digit number when we combine the
remainder and the result is the next
value 2 divided by so to get started we
take 12 divided by 2 this is going to be
6 with the remainder of 0 so I'm going
to write this as a remainder of 0 and
then 6 so the new value we divide by is
already written as a two-digit number is
0 6 so we take 6 divided by 2 that's
going to be a remainder of 0 and a
result of 3 so now you can see why we're
writing it this way the 0 3 becomes the
next thing we want to divide by so we
take 3 divided by 2 is 1 with the
remainder of 1 this one with the
remainder 1 becomes 11 11 divided by 2
is 5 with the remainder of 1 now we can
just read off that we want to take 15
divided by 2 which will be 7 with the
remainder of 1 we can then read off we
want to take 17 divided by 2 which is 8
with the remainder 1 so you can use a
shorthand to figure out the decimal
expansion of 12 over 19 we read off the
second numbers this is 6 3 1 5 7 8 and
you can check on your calculator this is
in fact 12 divided by 19 so it's a
pretty neat trick if you want to treat
this video as a puzzle you can try and
figure out why this method works or if
you're curious you can keep watching and
I'm going to present a proof of why this
method allows you to divide numbers by
so here's the proof let's say we want to
take X divided by nineteen we'll assume
X here is a whole number but
algebraically everything we're doing
here is going to hold even for any value
of X so we can write x over 19 as X
divided by xx minus one we now divide
each spot we divide the numerator and
the denominator by 20 so that becomes x
over 20 divided by one minus one over 20
now why did I do this the reason is I
wanted to make the denominator 1 minus 1
you know I want the fraction one divided
by one minus one over 20 because there's
a special result that if you have a
geometric series with the common ratio
are the sum of that infinite series is
equal to one divided by one minus R so
now I'm using it in Reverse I'm going to
take 1 divided by 1 minus 1 over 20 and
expand that out so that we have the sum
of terms with a common ratio of 1 over
20 so that means we're multiplying x
over 20 by an infinite series that
starts with 1 and is a common ratio of 1
over 20 I'll distribute that 1 over 20
so we have X multiplied by an infinite
series of 1 over 20 with the common
ratio of 1 over 20 now what is 22 you
know 20 is equal to 2 times 10 so we can
split this out and saying 2 divided by
20 we could take that as 2 steps we can
divide it by 2
and then we could divide it by 10 so
here we have the expansion that we want
if you look at each term in the
geometric series we're dividing by 2 and
then dividing by 10 so the first term x
over 2 divided by 10 that gives us the
first value of our decimal expansion to
get the next value we then take x over 2
divided by 2 again which gives us x over
2 squared and then we need to divide
that by 10 so that second term and our
expansion is going to give us the next
value of the decimal so this is how
we're repeatedly dividing again by two
to get the new decimal place each
decimal place is the value for the next
power of ten and you can clearly see the
numerators in each time we're dividing
by two again now what happens if you
have a remainder well as you can see
each term is going to be one tenth of
the previous term so if you have a
remainder you know that's going to add
ten times to the next fraction when you
get a common rate you know denominator
you're gonna have to multiply that
remainder by ten so you can add it to
the next fraction so this is how we get
the procedure where we repeatedly divide
by two is how we can figure out the
decimal expansion for any number over 19
thanks for watching this video please
subscribe to my channel I make videos on
math and game theory you can catch me on
my blog mind your decisions which you
can follow on Facebook Google+ and
patreon you can catch me on social media
at presh teleworker and if you liked
this video please check out my books
this trick about dividing by 19 is
actually included in my book the best
mental math tricks I provided a link to
that book and all my books in the video
description